# Networks

## Common terms

IP (Internet Protocol) Address:

    An IP address is a unique numerical identifier assigned to each device connected to a network that uses the Internet Protocol for communication. It allows devices to send and receive data across the internet or local networks. There are two versions: IPv4 (e.g., 192.168.1.1) and IPv6 (e.g., 2001:0db8:85a3::8a2e:0370:7334).

MAC (Media Access Control) Address:

    A MAC address is a hardware identifier assigned to a network interface card (NIC) by the manufacturer. It is used to identify devices on a local network and is usually written in hexadecimal format (e.g., 00:1A:2B:3C:4D:5E). Unlike IP addresses, MAC addresses do not change and are unique to each device.

DNS (Domain Name System):

    DNS is a system that translates human-readable domain names (like www.example.com) into IP addresses that computers use to identify each other on the network. It acts like the internet's phonebook, helping users reach websites without needing to remember numerical IP addresses.

DHCP (Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol):

    DHCP is a network protocol used to automatically assign IP addresses and other network configuration settings (such as the default gateway and DNS servers) to devices on a network. This simplifies the process of connecting devices, as users don’t have to manually configure network settings.

## Ip

For windows:
```bash
ipconfig /all
```

Or in table:
```bash
route print
```
 
For linux:
```bash
ip addr
```

## Ping

For linxu:
```bash
ping -c 4 8.8.8.8
ping -c 4 google.com
```

For windows:
```bash
ping 8.8.8.8
ping google.com
```

## Trace route

For windows:
```bash
tracert google.com
```

For linux:
```bash
traceroute google.com
```

## Running local server

Running local server on port 12345:
```bash
nc -l 12345
```

Connecting to server:
```bash
nc localhost 12345
```

## SSL

```bash
openssl s_client -connect google.com:443
```

## Curl

```bash
curl -I https://google.com
```

## DNS

```bash
nslookup google.com
nslookup -type=ANY google.com
```

```bash
dig example.com
```

## Task for self-check

Mini Project: "Network Report"

Each student chooses one website (for example, github.com) and prepares the following:

    1. The IP addresses and DNS records of the website.
    2. A traceroute to the server.
    3. A list of open ports.
    4. The HTTP response headers.
    5. The SSL certificate (Is it valid?).